= Syscalls
:numbered:

This document contains a list of Linux syscalls together with short
descriptions.

If there are multiple syscalls that do the same thing, then the obsolete
variants are not listed. See the manpages for more detailed descriptions, e.g.,
`man 2 open`.

Note that the manpages describe the glibc wrappers and not the syscalls
themselves. The syscalls do, in general, look like the wrappers, but one
difference is how errors are reported. On error, the syscall returns a negative
value which the wrapper stores in `errno`.

Also note that the manpages are not always complete when talking about the
differences between the syscall and its wrapper. For example, the `getcwd`
syscall returns the length of the current working directory on success. The
manpage does not mention this.

== Files

*openat*:: Opens a file.

*close*:: Closes a file descriptor.

*read*:: Reads data from the object represented by a file descriptor into a
buffer.

*pread*:: Like `read`, but you can specify the offset from which to read. This
operation doesn't change the offset of the file description.

*readv*:: Like `read`, but you can specify multiple buffers in which the data
will be stored.

*preadv*:: Combines `pread` and `readv`.

*write*:: Writes data from a buffer to the object represented by a file
descriptor.

*pwrite*:: Like `write`, but you can specify the offset to which to write. This
operation doesn't change the offset of the file description.

*writev*:: Like `write`, but you can specify multiple buffers from which the
data will be written.

*pwritev*:: Combines `pwrite` and `writev`.

*fstatat*:: Retrieves information stored in an inode.

*lseek*:: Changes the offset of a file description.

*faccessat*:: Checks whether a file exists or whether in user can read, write,
and/or execute the file. Note that this uses the real user id and not the
effective user id.

*pipe2*:: Creates a one-directional pipe.

*ioctl*:: Changes the device parameters of a device special file.

*dup3*:: Duplicates a file descriptor.

*fcntl*:: Performs various operations on file descriptors.

*flock*:: Modifies advisory locks on files.

*fsync*:: Flushes all buffered data of a file descriptor to the file system.

*fdatasync*:: Like `fsync` but doesn't flush all metadata.

*truncate*, *ftruncate*:: Changes the length of a file.

*getdents*:: Given a file descriptor to a directory, reads information about the
files in the directory.

*renameat2*:: Renames a file.

*mkdirat*:: Creates a directory.

*rmdir*:: Deletes an empty directory.

*linkat*:: Given a path, creates a new hardlink to the referenced inode.

*unlinkat*:: Removes a hardlink to an inode.

*symlinkat*:: Creates a symlink to a path.

*readlinkat*:: Given a path to a symbolic link, returns its destination.

*fchmodat*:: Changes the permissions of a file.

*fchownat*:: Changes the owner of a file.

*utimensat*:: Updates the access and modification time of a file.

*umask*:: Sets the processes file mode creation mask.

*mknodat*:: Creates a device special file in the filesystem.

*statfs*, *fstatfs*:: Returns information about the filesystem on which a file
is stored.

*setxattr*, *lsetxattr*, *fsetxattr*:: Sets an extended attribute on a file.

*getxattr*, *lgetxattr*, *fgetxattr*:: Retrieves an extended attribute from a
file.

*listxattr*, *llistxattr*, *flistxattr*:: Retrieves all extended attributes from
a file.

*removexattr*, *lremovexattr*, *fremovexattr*:: Removes an extended attribute
from a file.

*memfd_create*:: Creates an anonymous file backed by memory.

*readahead*:: Initiates readahead of a file descriptor in the kernel.

*fadvise*:: Informs the kernel that a file will have a certain usage pattern.

*splice*:: Moves data between a file descriptor and a kernel buffer.

*tee*:: Copies data from a file descriptor to a kernel buffer.

*vmsplice*:: According to the manpage, this syscall copies user memory to a
kernel buffer (pipe). However, this is not correct. If the passed pipe file
descriptor refers to the read-end of a pipe, then the content of the pipe will
be copied into user memory. This means that it is impossible to use this syscall
safely.

*sync_file_range*:: Flushes parts of a kernel buffered file to disk.

*fallocate*:: Allocates disk space for a file, replaces parts of a file by file
holes, or collapses a range in a file.

*eventfd2*:: Creates a file descriptor for event notification.

*name_to_handle_at*:: Creates a file handle to a path.

*open_by_handle_at*:: Opens a file handle.

== Files (multiple)

*ppoll*:: Sleeps until at least one of a given set of file descriptors becomes
"ready".

*pselect6*:: Like `ppoll`.

*io_setup*:: Creates an async I/O context.

*io_destroy*:: Destroys an async I/O context.

*io_getevents*:: Reads events from an async I/O completion queue.

*io_submit*:: Adds I/O request to an async I/O context.

*io_cancel*:: Cancels an I/O request on an async I/O context.

*epoll_create1*:: Creates an epoll instance.

*epoll_ctl*:: Manipulates an epoll instance.

*epoll_pwait*:: Waits for an epoll instance to signal readiness.

*inotify_init1*:: Initializes a file system watcher.

*inotify_add_watch*:: Adds a watch for a directory or file.

*inotify_rm_watch*:: Removes a previously added watch.

*fanotify_init*:: Initializes a file system watcher.

*fanotify_mark*:: Modifies a file system watcher.

*sync*:: Flushes a kernel buffers to the disks.

*syncfs*:: Like `sync` but only flushes one filesystem.

== Memory

*mmap*:: Maps the contents of a file into memory.

*mremap*:: Resizes a mapping.

*munmap*:: Unmaps a region mapped with `mmap`.

*msync*:: Flushes changes in a memory mapped region to the filesystem.

*mprotect*:: Changes whether a certain memory region can be read from, written to,
or executed.

*madvise*:: Informs the kernel to expect a certain usage pattern of a certain
memory region.

*brk*:: Changes the program break.

*mincore*:: Determines whether a certain page is in memory.

*mlock*:: Prevents a certain memory region from being swapped out of ram.

*munlock*:: Reverts `mlock`.

*mlockall*:: Like `mlock` but works on all of the calling process's memory.

*munlockall*:: Unlocks all locked pages of the calling process.

*futex*:: Manipulates a fast user-space mutex.

*mbind*:: Sets the memory policy for a memory range.

*set_mempolicy*:: Sets the default memory policy for a process.

*get_mempolicy*:: Gets the memory policy of a process.

*migrate_pages*:: Moves pages between nodes.

*move_pages*:: Moves certain pages to another node.

== Processes

*getpid*:: Returns the process id of the current process (thread group.)

*getppid*:: Returns the process id of the parent process (thread group.)

*setpgid*:: Sets the process group of a process.

*getpgid*:: Returns the process group of a process.

*setsid*:: Creates a new session.

*getsid*:: Returns the session id of a process.

*getgroups*:: Returns the supplementary groups of a process.

*setgroups*:: Sets the supplementary groups of a process.

*setresuid*:: Sets the real, effective, and saved user ids of a process.

*getresuid*:: Gets the real, effective, and saved user ids of a process.

*setresgid*:: Sets the real, effective, and saved group ids of a process.

*getresgid*:: Gets the real, effective, and saved group ids of a process.

*clone*:: Creates a new process (task) that can share parts of its execution
context with the calling process. This system call is used to create both
threads and separate processes.

*unshare*:: Unshares certain parts of the current processes execution context
that are currently shared with other processes.

*execve*:: Executes the program located at a path.

*execveat*:: Like `execve` but relative paths are interpreted relative to a file
descriptor.

*exit*:: Exits the current thread.

*exit_group*:: Exits the current process (thread group.)

*waitid*:: Waits for a child process to enter a certain state or reaps
terminated child processes.

*kill*:: Sends a signal to a process or process group.

*tgkill*:: Sends a signal to a thread.

*getcwd*:: Returns the current working directory of the process.

*chdir*:: Changes the current working directory of the process.

*fchdir*:: Like `chdir` but takes a file descriptor instead of a path.

*prlimit64*:: Gets and sets resource limits of a process.

*getrusage*:: Returns resource usage of the calling thread, process, or children
of the process.

*ptrace*:: "Trace" a process. (for debugging etc.)

*capget*:: Gets the capabilities of a process.

*capset*:: Sets the capabilities of a process.

*personality*:: Changes the execution domain of the process.

*vhangup*:: Simulates a hangup on the current terminal.

*pivot_root*:: Replaces the root directory of the calling process.

*chroot*:: Changes the root directory of the calling process.

*prctl*:: Changes various process properties.

*arch_prctl*:: Changes various architecture dependent process properties.

*ioperm*:: Changes which I/O ports the program can access.

*gettid*:: Returns the task id of the calling thread.

*set_thread_area*:: Sets a TLS entry in the global descriptor table.

*get_thread_area*:: Reads an entry from the global descriptor table.

*set_tid_address*:: Sets an address to which the current thread will write a `0`
when it terminates.

*ioprio_set*:: Sets the I/O scheduling class and priority of a process, process
group, or user.

*ioprio_get*:: Gets the I/O scheduling class and priority of a process, process
group, or user.

*set_robust_list*:: Sets the thread's robust futex list.

*get_robust_list*:: Gets the thread's robust futex list.

*process_vm_readv*:: Reads data from another processes virtual memory.

*process_vm_writev*:: Writes data to another processes virtual memory.

*perf_event_open*:: Sets up a file descriptor for performance monitoring.

*setns*:: Reassociates a thread with a namespace.

*getcpu*:: Returns the CPU on which the current thread is running.

*kcmp*:: Checks whether two processes share resources.

*seccomp*:: Modifies the seccomp state of the process.

*bpf*:: Operates on the kernel's eBPF virtual machine.

== Scheduling

*sched_setattr*:: Sets the thread's scheduling policy and related parameters.

*sched_getattr*:: Sets the thread's scheduling policy and related parameters.

*sched_get_priority_max*:: Returns the maximal static priority of a policy.

*sched_get_priority_min*:: Returns the minimal static priority of a policy.

*sched_rr_get_interval*:: Returns the time quantum of the round-robin policy.

*sched_yield*:: Deschedules the current thread.

*sched_setaffinity*:: Sets the set of CPUs a thread can run on.

*sched_getaffinity*:: Gets the set of CPUs a thread can run on.

*setpriority*:: Sets the dynamic scheduling priority of a process group or user.

*getpriority*:: Gets the dynamic scheduling priority of a process group or user.

*pause*:: Deschedules the current thread until a signal arrives.

== Sockets

*socket*:: Creates a socket endpoint.

*connect*:: Connects a socket to an address.

*accept4*:: Accepts a connection request on a socket.

*recvfrom*:: Receives data on a socket, stores it in a buffer, and returns the
address the data was received from.

*recvmsg*:: Like `recvfrom` but can store data into multiple buffers and can
receive auxiliary data.

*recvmmsg*:: Like `recvmsg` but can receive multiple messages at the same time.

*sendto*:: Sends data from a buffer to a specified address.

*sendmsg*:: Like `sendto` but can send data from multiple buffers at once and can
send auxiliary data.

*sendmmsg*:: Like `sendmsg` but can send multiple messages at the same time.

*shutdown*:: Shuts down parts of a socket.

*bind*:: Assigns an address to a socket.

*listen*:: Marks a socket as accepting connections.

*getsockname*:: Returns the address assigned to a socket.

*getpeername*:: Returns the address of the peer connected to a socket.

*socketpair*:: Creates a pair of sockets that are connected to each other.

*setsockopt*:: Changes a socket option.

*getsockopt*:: Returns the value of a socket option.

== System

*uname*:: Returns static information about the system.

*sysinfo*:: Returns resource usage of the system.

*syslog*:: Manipulates the kernel log buffer.

*sysfs*:: Returns information about the filesystems in the kernel.

*getrandom*:: Returns a certain number of random bytes from the system.

*acct*:: Switches process accounting on or off.

*mount*:: Mounts a filesystem.

*umount2*:: Unmounts a filesystem.

*swapon*:: Turns a file or block device into a potential swap area.

*swapoff*:: Reverts `swapon`.

*reboot*:: Performs various operations related to rebooting.

*sethostname*:: Changes the hostname of the system.

*setdomainname*:: Changes the domain name of the system.

*init_module*:: Loads a kernel module from a path.

*finit_module*:: Like `init_module` but accepts a file descriptor.

*delete_module*:: Unloads a kernel module.

*query_module*:: Returns information about kernel modules.

*quotactl*:: Manipulates and queries disk quota values of users and groups.

*lookup_dcookie*:: Given a cookies, retrieves an associated file path.

*kexec_load*:: Loads a new kernel image to be executed via `reboot`.

*kexec_file_load*:: Loads a new kernel image to be executed via `reboot`.

*add_key*:: Adds a key to the kernel's key management facility.

*request_key*:: Requests a key from the kernel's key management facility.

*keyctl*:: Manipulates the kernel's key management facility.

== IPC

*mq_open*:: Opens a POSIX message queue.

*mq_unlink*:: Removes a POSIX message queue.

*mq_timedsend*:: Adds a message to a POSIX message queue.

*mq_timedreceive*:: Retrieves a message from a POSIX message queue.

*mq_notify*:: Modifies whether this process is notified with a signal when a
message arrives on a POSIX message queue.

*mq_getsetattr*:: Modifies or retrieves attributes of a POSIX message queue.

== Time

*gettimeofday*:: Returns the current time and timezone.

*settimeofday*:: Sets the current time and timezone.

*times*:: Returns information about the CPU time used by the process and its
children.

*clock_settime*:: Sets the time of a clock.

*clock_gettime*:: Gets the time of a clock.

*clock_getres*:: Gets the resolution of a clock.

*clock_nanosleep*:: Sleeps until a certain point or for a certain time.

*clock_adjtime*:: Adjusts the time of a clock. Use `adjtimex` instead.

*adjtimex*:: Adjusts the system time.

*timerfd_create*:: Creates a new timer file descriptor.

*timerfd_settime*:: Sets the interval in which the timer expires.

*timerfd_gettime*:: Gets the interval in which the timer expires.

== Signals

*rt_sigaction*:: Changes the action taken when a signal is sent to the thread.

*rt_sigprocmask*:: Changes which signals can be sent to the thread.

*rt_sigreturn*:: Returns from a signal handler.

*rt_sigpending*:: Examines pending signals.

*rt_sigtimedwait*:: Waits for pending signals.

*rt_sigqueueinfo*:: Sends a signal to a process.

*rt_tgsigqueueinfo*:: Sends a signal to a thread.

*rt_sigsuspend*:: Suspends the process until one of a certain set of signals
arrives.

*sigaltstack*:: Modifies the stack of which signal handlers are executed.

*signalfd4*:: Creates a file descriptor that can be used to receive signals
synchronously.
